greetings everyone all over the world
this is laszlo Montgomery again with
another nice Chinese saying for you this
one today is something that shines a
light on what's considered one of the
many traditional virtues of Chinese
culture I feel the same way about this
particular virtue and so do a lot of
other people and other cultures as well
there's an old Chinese saying that I'm
paraphrasing so it's not to dump a whole
lot of Chinese on you it says the favor
of a drop of water should be returned
with an entire fount of water you know
someone does you a good turn you should
return the favor even more so to show
your appreciation one good turn deserves
another I guess you could say and the
Chinese saying we're gonna look at today
is all about this very idea today we
look at gun unto bulk okay as we always
do here at the Chinese sayings podcast
let's lay this one down in the
dissecting table and pick it apart God
means thankful to thank or to appreciate
unmans grace kindness a favor or help
gotten unto appreciate or be thankful
for the kindness appreciate the favor in
Chinese our American Thanksgiving
holiday is called the gun unhallowed a 2
in this example means to intend to do
something to plan to and bow means to
pay back or reciprocate to bow to intend
to reciprocate or pay back then we daisy
chain the whole thing together and get
thankful favor and tend to pay back okay
that's easy to figure out but what's the
story behind that that's the raison
d'etre of this entire podcast program
how did those four characters get strung
together like that now me to call anyone
surely but surely there's a story behind
this one and wouldn't you know it our
story today once again comes from the
venerable sir jee the records of the
grand historian shammah Chin's
blockbuster from the Han Dynasty
contained in this classic
is a story about someone we covered once
in the China history podcast episode 111
and the history of the once mighty whoo
state our star today is a famous name
from the spring and autumn period that
portion of the Eastern Joe that came
right before the warring States Period
this twin show or spring and autumn era
was the time of loud sir and Confucius
and many other great Chinese
philosophers today we look at a story
that co-stars the great general
strategist personal friend of Suns ax
AKA son su as we say here in hollywood
and a model for what it means to be
loyal loose issue and his mighty woo
army were planning an attack on the
state of jung to the north near law Jung
Jung was a Joe dynasty vassal state that
they had seen better days now under
their king ding of Jung Jung King Kong
who reigned 529 514 BCE they were
vulnerable and in the gun sights of the
wolf state as woods eschew ready desire
me to march north and take down Jung
king ding called out to all his generals
officials and people too and offered
great rewards for anyone who could come
up with a plan to defend against and
ultimately defeat whew four days passed
and no one could offer king ding any
advice on how to handle the coming
onslaught from Lutz's shoes great woo
army woods issue and the state of Wu by
the way that's two different Chinese
characters woo and woo anyways who said
that king ding started to sweat as
Woods's shoes army began its march north
to do battle at this most desperate hour
a simple fisherman walked to the palace
and in his hand he carried an ore from
his fishing boat a boat he inherited
from his father another fisherman the
king and his officials looked at the
young fisherman skeptically but her damn
out when he asked the fisherman how many
chariots soldiers and weapons he needed
the fisherman replied to the king
I need nothing from you I will deal with
what's his shoes are me by myself and
with this single or in my hand the king
and his officials passed a few
one-liners back and forth and had a
little fun with this young sincere
fisherman who stood before them okay
young man go then go stop this terrible
army from advancing on our kingdom and
you shall be amply rewarded the king and
his ministers had sadly concluded that
desperate times require desperate
measures and these were desperate times
they had nothing to lose from this Hail
Mary the fisherman thereupon with or in
hand began walking slowly southward to
meet up with what's his shoes army he
came upon the military camp took a big
breath gathered up his courage and began
walking into the center of the military
camp he began singing a song loudly man
hiding amongst the reeds man hiding
amongst the reeds remember who saved
your life when you were drowning in the
river the Big Dipper carved in your body
your sword was returned to you do you
remember the fisherman who saved your
life Woods's shoe heard this from his
tent and perked up at once who is that
out there he demanded bring him to me
his soldiers let the fishermen into
woods his shoes tent and he stood before
the mighty general carrying his or why
have you come here young man hoots as
you asked perhaps you recognize this or
General Wolfe the man said my father was
a fisherman before me and used it for
his livelihood he also once saved your
life with this or Woods's shoe was at
once brought to tears as he recalled so
many years ago when he had almost died
trying to get across a river he had
almost drowned in this incident but a
fisherman had saved him he had always
wanted to find some way to pay the
fisherman back for his act of kindness
but all these years the chance eluded
him the fisherman replied we and young
are under attack by you our livelihood
is being threatened the King offered a
reward to see who could stop your
dance I come here before you and ask you
to remember the good deed my father did
for you once saving your life Woods
issue of course remember this incident
from long ago the fisherman continued I
am humbly asking you to consider halting
your plans of conquest of Jung and leave
us be for the sake of the deed my father
did for you all those years ago woods
issue said tears falling from his eyes
if not for your father I would have
perished that day long ago I have gone
on to live a rich life attaining high
rank yet none of this could have ever
happened had your father not saved me at
once woods issue gave the order for the
army to begin packing up and to begin
marching back to wool the campaign to
attack Jung was ended the fisherman
returned to Jung and told king ding that
it was over it's a shoe and the mighty
woo army were gone king ding could
hardly contain his relief and
thankfulness at the young fisherman as
promised the King rewarded him with
lands and henceforth he became known
throughout the land as the officer
fisherman so as samat Shen said in his
shirt gee when telling the story from
the ancient state of wool woods a shoe
exhibited the act of god unto bulk he
remembered the kindness once showed to
him and was determined to repay it one
day and when the fisherman came to woods
issue the great general showed his
appreciation and returned the favor to
have done otherwise would have changed
our story and there's another Chun you
hanging out there that describes someone
who repays a favor by stabbing you in
the back this is a chung you we could
all embrace gan unto bulk our chung you
for this week one good turn deserves
another if someone does you a solid hey
man to bow pay them back through some
act of kindness or generosity ok that's
it for this time everyone maybe think
about coming back next time we'll have
another saying that you can enjoy and
add to your growing collection so until
we meet again
this is laszlo Montgomery welcoming you
as I often do not in vain I hope to go
check out our other shows from teacup
media there's the China history podcast
and the China vintage shower and even
more coming in 2017 I'm signing off from
some place in Los Angeles County deep
deep in an underground hermetically
sealed secret location come join me next
time won't you for another inspirational
episode of the Chinese sayings podcast